[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger today
we're going to have a little bit of fun working
out what the curvature of a parabola might be
we're actually going to get a very explicit
formula for it which is basically a classical
well-known formula but the novelty is that we're
going to do it without any calculus without any
differential geometry without any angles or real
numbers so yet another small piece of evidence
that it is possible to do mathematics completely
correctly algebraically logically without
any infinite processes slowly we're going to
accumulate more and more examples of such things
till we end up really having a viable alternative
to the current status quo okay so the notion of
curvature is very classical goes back to the 17th
century the beginnings of calculus and in fact
cartisian geometry and I think it was probably
huin the Dutch mathematician astronomer who first
came up with the idea so here's a curve gamma and
the idea is that at any point on the curve we can
approximate the curve well first of all with a a
straight line which is the tangent but sort of one
step up from that we can also hope to approximate
the curve near that point with a circle there is
some circle which goes through that point and is
also tangent to the curve at the with the same
tangent line and it which really best approximates
the circle now that might be a circle with a
small radius or a bigger radius depending on
how sort of curv the curve is at the particular
point that we're interested in so the official
definition is that the curvature little K is 1
/ R where R is the radius of this circle which
best approximates the curve at some point a on
it so for here if that's the point A1 then the
curvature at A1 of the curve gamma would be 1 over
R1 one over this radius here and the curvature
of the curve at the point A2 well that would be
K2 would be one over this radius R2 so that's a
classical notion of curvature which of course is
not so convenient for us because there's lengths
involved these radi are lengths and so they
have square roots and so that's a story that
we would rather avoid if we could so how do the
17th century mathematicians calculate curvature
for example here's a curve and here's a point on
the curve say a how would we calculate what the
curvature of the curve at that particular point
is well there's a couple of different ways of
approaching this and here are perhaps the two
simplest ways of explaining it so one formula
is that the curvature is D Theta DS the rate of
change of the angle of inclination of the tangent
with respect to Arc Length okay there's obviously
a bit of calculus involved here we're not going to
fuss around about it too much but basically the
arc length is according to the standard Dogma
the length of the curve from some base point so
if we fix some base Point here and we somehow
measure the length of the curve whatever that
means then that's a quantity that varies as we
move along the curve and we're also interested in
the tangent at some point so as we move along the
curve the tangent is going to move as well and
if we are always recording the angle that this
tangent makes with the say x Direction call that
Theta then then the rate of change of that angle
with respect to this Ark length is another way of
getting at the curvature so the angle is changing
a lot for a small uh sort of increment of length
then the curvature is high and otherwise it's
low okay another way of thinking about what
it is is sort of geometrically we can sort
of construct the the curvature geometrically
by taking some nearby points B and C to the
point that we're interested in still on the
curve and then we can say join the lines from
a to c and a to B and take perpendicular
bis sectors of those two segments where
they meet will be the point which is the center
of the circle which passes through those three
points that's the basic construction of the
circle that passes through three points now
that's not exactly the approximating circle that
we want because B and C are not exactly at a but
if we then start moving B and C closer to a then
it turns out that this circle starts approaching
some limiting Circle and then the quantity the
curvature that we're interested in is sort of
the limit of this radius here the inverse of
this radius as B and C approach a that's kind
of a geometrical way of visualizing um what
is going on here this is very classical and
the 17th century mathematicians liked this idea a
lot and proved theorems and made calculations to
compute curvatures and these corresponding sort of
centers of curvature for various classical curves
so that discussion is for us very problematic
because it rests on a whole lot of things that
first of all we're not quite sure about and also
some other things that we haven't developed we
certainly haven't talked about calculus yet
so there's no need for us to invoke calculus
ideas but in fact the notion even of the curve
itself is problematic this is another kind of
General concept that although it's easy enough to
write down lots of examples of things that ought
to be curves uh to actually say precisely what a
curve is is surprisingly complicated and the 17th
and 18th century mathematicians real iiz this
they were not unaware of this so we can be more
precise by being more restrictive in other words
by setting our sights a little bit lower trying to
bite off a little bit less we can hope to do the
job a little bit more carefully and accurately so
what we're going to do is aspire to something less
we're going to restrict ourselves to much simpler
kinds of curves that we can actually bring into
existence completely solidly so we'll go back back
to our poly numbers may remember poly number is
a list of numbers like this this kind of notation
there's a pol number P and it's a quadratic Pol
because there's only three entries to it so it
corresponds to a degree 2 Expression 2 - Alpha +
3 Alpha 2 and we can think of this as being the
quadratic polinom just another way of writing the
same thing so Associated to this we can associate
a a curve by graphing this so we can take this
Pol number and we can create this expression from
it y = 3x^2 - x + 2 in the same spirit that we
defined a circle as x^2 + y^2 = 1 or x^2 + y^2 = x
okay so this expression we can say is a quadratic
curve it's an expression that derives from this
quadratic polum and since we understand quadratic
Pol numbers completely we have complete control
over what the range of possibilities are for
such things and here is the graph of such a
thing it's as we all know a parabola opening
upwards because that coefficient is positive
and it goes through a few points uh that we can
plot okay so we are going to be a little bit
uh more restrictive we're going to be interested
in trying to figure out what the Curve of such a
quadratic curve is of course it's going to depend
on which point we choose obviously the curve is
a little bit more curved here than somewhere up
here here it's getting a little bit more straight
here it's quite curved okay so to bring things
into Focus we're going to choose our simplest
Parabola y = x^2 which has the familiar diagram
that we've all seen many times there it is there
and we're going to choose an arbitrary point on it
call that point a and it has coordinates T t^2 so
we're just basically choosing an x coordinate
and then the y-coordinate will be the square
of that x coordinate so there's T t^2 and we're
interested in calculating the curvature of this
Parabola at that point and what we're going to do
is we're going to use this basic fact that we've
been talking about in our last video that if we
have a circle of circum quadrants R so capital r
is not the radius but the square of the radius
so actually the quadrants from the center to
any point on it and if we have three points on
that Circle forming a little triangle and that
triangle has quadrants as q1 Q2 and Q3 and has
quadria a a is also 16 * the square of the area
then we saw that in this case the curvature of
that Circle which is by definition one over this
circum quadrants R turns out to be this lovely
expression The quadria Divided q1 Q2 Q3 so it's
essentially the quadri S of renormalized by the
product of the three quadrants is so this works
for a triangle on a circle so we're going to
apply this to a triangle on the parabola okay
so here's our Parabola again y = x^2 and now we're
going to choose three points say A1 which is T1 T1
2 A2 which is T2 T2 2 and A3 which is T3 t32 and
at first we're not going to assume that these are
anywhere special they're just any points on the
parabola and now we're going to basically make a
small calculation and really the essence of the
entire calculation is really on this page it's a
little bit like magic okay so we're interested in
two quantities we're interested in this quadria a
formed by this triangle here and we're interested
in the product of these three quadrant is q1 Q2
and Q3 all right so let's start with a the
quadre of this triangle which is also the
Archimedes function applied to the three numbers
q1 Q2 and Q3 that q1 + Q2 + Q3 2- 2 q1 2 + Q2
2 + Q3 2 expression but I remind you that we had
an alternate way of thinking about the quadria
in terms of actually the coordinates of the three
points if we know the coordinates X and Y of the
three points then we can write down another
expression for this quadrant it's four times
this quad quantity squared and this quantity
is obtained by taking the X1 * Y2 - X2 * y1
expression for this pair and then a corresponding
expression for this pair and a corresponding
expression for this pair and adding them all up
so we get T1 * T2 2 minus T2 * T1 2 from these two
points and then similarly moving to these ones
we get T2 * T3 2 - T3 * T2 2 and now moving to
these two points we get T3 * T1 2 minus T1 * T3
2 and you should think about this as that little
grouping that little grouping and that little
grouping and to go from one of these groupings
to the next grouping we just bump each one of the
indices up cyclically by one so going from one
to two from two to three and from 3 to one okay
very pleasantly what's inside the brackets here
ends up being this quantity here perhaps with a
minus sign but when we Square it the minus sign
doesn't become involved so we just end up getting
4 T1 - T2 2 T2 - T3 2 T3 - T1 2 this expression
the quadri is exactly this Pleasant product
of the squares of the differences between the
coordinates that's like magic but it shouldn't
really be a big surprise to us because if we
think for a second and say well this depends on T1
T2 and T3 there are these three numbers floating
around now if T1 happened to equal T2 then these
two points would coincide and that triangle that
we have would degenerate and so its quadria would
be zero and that's telling us that T1 minus T2 to
be a factor of this quadria similarly T2 minus
T3 ought to be a factor and T3 minus T1 ought
to be a factor and then since the whole thing is
independent of ordering because the quadrate is
independent of the ordering it's not a surprise
that there are squares here great okay so that's
half the battle that's the numerator of the
expression we're interested in and what about
the denominator well that's the product of these
Q's so let's calculate q1 the quadrants between
say A2 and A3 well that's pretty simple it's just
the difference in the x coordinates squared plus
the difference in the Y coordinates squared if
we stare at this for a second we see that this
one here which is a difference of squares will
also have this T3 minus T2 Factor inside it so
we can factor out T3 minus T2 2ar and there'll be
a one from this term and there'll be a T3 + T2 2ar
from this term because T3 minus T2 * T3 + T2 is T3
2 - T2 2 so since there's a square there there's
going to be a square here and a square there and
that's a nice expression for q1 okay and similarly
there's a completely analogous expression for Q2
involving the t3s and t1s and for Q3 involving the
t1s and t2s so we have all our ingredients we can
just write down our curvature for this triangle
here okay we haven't actually got the curvature at
a point yet we've got the quadratic curvature of
this triangle essentially all right so going one
step at a time first the circum quadrants of the
triangle that we're interested in the quadrants
of that uh Circle that passes through those three
points will be the product of the cues div divided
by the quadria okay and that turns out to be this
term time this term time this term divided by
four because we've just canceled this Factor
T1 minus T2 2 T2 - T3 2 and T3 - T1 2 that will
be common in the numerator and denominator here
after all the quadria was just four times this
thing and the q1 was this thing times this the
Q2 will be this times this and the Q3 will be
this times this so This Factor will appear both
in the numerator and the denominator and happily
we can cancel them both from the numerator and
denominator okay so then the curvature which
is actually what we're really interested in
is going to be the reciprocal of the circum
quadrants it's 1 / R we just flip this thing
over and we get 4 over 1 + T3 + T2 2 * 1 + T1 +
T3 all 2ar * 1 + T2 + T1 all squared so what that
is that that's a formula for the curvature of
the circle which passes through three arbitrary
points on our Parabola there's A1 A2 A3 given
by these X values T1 T2 and T3 and here's an
expression for the curvature of this circle that
pass through those three points so now if we look
at that expression for the curvature of this
General triangle on the parabola that we just
derived involving T1 T2 and T3 we see that
there's nothing to prevent us from actually
setting them all equal to each other setting
t1al t2al T3 equals say Su value T then each
of the terms in the denominator are the same
they're all 1 plus 4 t^2 because it would be
something like T1 + T2 all squared if T1 and T2
are equal to T then that's like 1 + 2 T ^2 or
1 + 4 T ^2 and there will be three such factors
that will all be the same so we get 1 + 4 t^2
cubed on the bottom and the four that was there
on the top okay so we can think about what this
is is some kind of limit value that we get when
we let T1 T2 and T3 all move these three points
on the x-axis all move towards the value of T that
we're interested in for our original single point
a but really we're not really taking a limit
as such okay there's no real process of of
you know getting closer and closer and closer
we're not doing that we're just taking taking
this expression and replacing T1 T2 and T3
with t just like that it's a purely algebraic
replacement now if we think back to the previous
step before we cancelled there were factors T1
minus T2 T2 - T3 T3 - T1 in the numerator and
denominator if at that point we had plugged in
T1 = t2al T3 then we would have gotten 0 over
0 so at that stage we were not allowed to sort
of bring all the t's together but happily once
we've actually let the algebra run its course
and the algebra has given us an expression
nice rational expression for this curvature
then we can do this and so it does make
sense to Define this to be the quadratic
curvature of the parabola at the point AAL
t t ^2 in other words the definition of the
curvature of the parabola at this point
a can be this this is the procedure that
we adopt we calculate an expression for this
quadratic curvature of a triangle a general
triangle on the parabola and then if we can
we replace each of the points with a single
point and if we get something that makes
sense well that's going to be our quadratic
curvature this is not a new formula it's
perhaps somewhat novel derivation of it but
uh the curvature of the parabola has been
well studied for centuries so classically
the classical curvature which is little K is the
square root of our K so if we take a square root
then we have h two here and we have well we have
to take the square root over here so there's going
to be a 3 over 2 so for example if T is equal to
1 up here we would get a 1 + 4 that's 5 cubed so
the quadratic curvature is 4 over 125 classically
the classical curvature little K would be 2 over
theare root of 125 and of course by now you're
quite expecting me to say and that's of course
no problem because we just take a few million
trillion years calculating this Square < TK of
125 as we always do right to infinity and then we
have otk of 125 so this little equation involves
an infinite amount of work this equation involves
about 10 seconds work we just plug in tal 1 and
evaluate it we get 4 over 125 end of story
that's the quadratic curvature it's not just
a small difference between these two things
it may appear to be a small difference it's
a huge computational difference and a rather
significant conceptual difference too okay
don't minimize the the big step up going from
here to here this is the right way of thinking
for sure okay so good this has been a lot of
fun so you'll probably want to calculate some
curvatures for other curves and I suggest that you
try it for the other simple uh sort of polinomial
Curves like y = x cubed or Y = X 4th or if you're
feeling ambitious you can try y = x to the N the
general case and I hope you appreciate sort of
the the power and the Elegance of applying this
formula really coming essentially from this one
dimensional projective geometry it's really the
projective triple quad formula in action that's
really behind our curvature formula in our next
video we're going to go back to that projective
onedimensional situation which gave us this very
rich formula and go a little bit further we're
going to look at not just three projective one
points but four projective one points and ask the
same kind of question that we did originally on
the line once we established a triple quad formula
for three points eventually we said well what
happens with four points and that turned out to
be very interesting connecting to Brahma gupta's
formulas Robin's formulas so we're going to do
the same kind of thing it's very natural thing
to do probably you've been waiting for me to do
this okay so we're going go back we look at the
projective quadruple quad formula what is it you
might like to see if you can figure out what it is
before the next lecture so I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening